Winter oil market outlook from "OPEC Monthly Oil Market Report – October 2022"
In August 2022, global refinery intake level has reached 81 mb/d, the highest monthly level registered since
the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic. The strong product consumption during the summer
season, amid positive fuel requirements from the industrial and manufacturing sectors, led to an increase
of 2.5mb/d, y-o-y. However, in September, refinery intake fell by nearly 1.2 mb/d m-o-m with the start of
peak autumn refinery maintenance in the US and Europe.
Meanwhile, global oil demand is now expected to
grow by about 2.6 mb/d in 2022. However, risks are
skewed to the downside, with slowing growth in the
global economy, if continued, likely leading to lower
oil demand in the months to come. While the first half
of the year saw good levels of mobility, industrial
activity and petrochemical feedstock requirements,
the momentum has seen a slowdown due to reduced
economic activity in recent months. A decrease in
product output since last year due to refinery
closures, pipeline and weather issues and other
constraints, weighed heavily on total OECD product
inventories, raising refinery margins to record-highlevels.
On the US Gulf Coast, refinery margins soared to arecord high of $49.92/b in June. Nevertheless,
seasonal demand for gasoline throughout the driving season in the US was lower than expected, showing
y-o-y declines from June to September 2022. In China, the government’s zero-COVID policy restrictions
led to a y-o-y decline in oil demand in 2Q22, followed by a brief recovery in 3Q22. The newly announced
lockdowns are expected to add to the uncertainty going forward. Looking ahead, refinery runs are expected
to slow going into 4Q22 as heavy maintenance work unfolds globally. However, ongoing tightness in
product availability, particularly for gasoil, should remain supportive for refinery runs, along with
expectations of a slight pick-up in diesel consumption for heating demand amid some additional potential
for gas-to-oil switching. This will also depend on the severity of the winter in the Northern Hemisphere.
Nevertheless, current signs of economic slowdown may further soften oil market fundamentals beyond the
seasonal refinery turnaround period. Looking to the coming winter season, a seasonal
pick-up in heating oil demand due to rising
requirements in the Northern Hemisphere is
projected. In 4Q22, OECD Europe and Americas, as
well as OECD Asia Pacific, are expected to see an
increase in demand for fuel oil and distillates
required for heating. In addition, rising
natural gas prices will potentially lead to some
degree of gas-to-oil switching in power generation in
both Europe and Asia, supporting demand for
residual fuels, heating oil and other fuels, which are
forecast to grow by 0.5 mb/d y-o-y in 4Q22. In OECD
Europe and the US, heating oil will be the main
driver, followed by residual fuels, while in OECD Asia
Pacific, residual fuels and other fuels are expected to
drive heating fuel demand. In 1Q23, global demand
for heating fuel is expected to grow by 0.6 mb/d, y-o-y. OECD Europe is expected to account for the largest
increase by 0.4 mb/d, mostly heating oil. Heating fuel demand in OECD Asia Pacific is also expected to grow
by 0.1 mb/d, y-o-y, while the US is forecast to show only marginal y-o-y growth.
Looking ahead, and despite the usual seasonal hike in oil demand for heating, the challenges presented by
the heightened levels of uncertainty, the slowing economic growth and a possible resurgence of COVID
restrictions in China and elsewhere are expected to impact oil demand in 2022 and 2023. With this in mind,
the participating countries of the Declaration of Cooperation (DoC), in their 5th October 2022 meeting have
pre-emptively and proactively decided to adjust their overall production, starting November 2022, downward
by 2 mb/d (from the August 2022 required production levels), in an ongoing and relentless effort to provide
a sustainable stability to the market.